Course Number; ENGR 102 Course Title; Engineering Lab I; Computation
Section; 461/561, 462/562, 463/563, & 564 Time; T Th
461/561 - 8;00 AM to 9;50 AM
462/562 - 10;05 AM to 11;55 AM
463/563 - 12;10 PM to 2;00 PM
564 - 2;15 PM to 4;05 PM
Location; ZACH 353 Credit Hours; 2
Instructor; Lance White '19 Office; ZACH 424 N
E-Mail; llwhite1 at tamu.edu Office Hours; By Appointment
Introduction to the design and development of computer applications for
engineers; computation to enhance problem-solving abilities; basic concepts
of software design through the implementation and debugging of student-written
programs; introduction to engineering majors, career exploration, engineering
practice within realistic constraints, e.g. economic, environmental, ethical,
health and safety, and sustainability; pathways to success in engineering.
C or better in MATH 150 or 151, or concurrent enrollment; admission to the
This course provides an introduction into the design and development of
computer applications for engineers. No prior experience in programming is
necessary. Students will learn to use computation to enhance their problem-
solving abilities. The course will cover basic concepts of software design
through the implementation and debugging of student-written programs. This
course also introduces engineering majors that are available to students, types
of work engineers in their field do, engineering practice within realistic
constraints, e.g. economic, environmental, ethical, health and safety, and
sustainability, and the paths to success in their chosen field.
Always use your at tamu.edu e-mail account to send correspondence between
yourself and the teaching team. Always include 'ENGR102' in the subject line
for all correspondence. Check your  at tamu.edu email account daily.
Use your Canvas account http;/canvas.tamu.edu to access course information,
Be an active problem solver, contributor, and discussant in class.
Be prepared and accountable for class by reading the assigned material ahead
of time and be able to answer simple questions over said material.
Be held accountable for all assigned material that is, or is not, explicitly
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to;
Demonstrate the use of basic programming techniques in the construction of
Collect, store, and manipulate data within a computer program
Collect, create, store, and manipulate data in larger structures such as arrays,
Use control structures, such as conditionals and loops, in computer programs
Declare and use functions to solve computing-related problems
Analyze data from a file and output processed results to a file
Decompose a complicated task into more manageable pieces
Apply programming techniques to solve problems in engineering, including
Applying vector and matrix manipulation of data to solve engineering problems
Graphically plotting data to visualize data and modeling concepts
Manipulating data to numerically calculate quantities in the context of
Applying conditionals and loops to implement numerical methods
Complete a team programming assignment that ties together concepts learned in
Complete the required homework assignments for introduction to engineering
majors, engineering practice, and student success
The course has one required textbook; ENGR 102; Engineering Lab I Computation -
Important. - This is an electronic book. You can purchase an access code
either at the bookstore, or online through the course Canvas web site. Do not
buy at both the bookstore and online. It is not recommended to purchase a book
and code package from other retailers, since their codes will not give you
proper access to the publisher's online materials. You must purchase the
textbook in order to submit your lab assignments.
Your BYO computer. You should have the required course software Microsoft
Office, Python 3 and associated IDE installed. Microsoft Office is available
from TAMU Software. Python 3 et al. will be installed in class.
Your required smartphone. Your cellphone may not be used as a calculator during
Access to your TAMU Google Drive. This is a free service arranged by TAMU, and
Languages; The primary language used in this course will be Python 3. Different
sections may use different Integrated Development Environments e.g. PyCharm,
Introduction to Majors; Information modules on the departments and majors of
the college will be presented at various points of the term. The weeks during
which these modules are made available have been coordinated with other
activities the departments have planned. The goal of these modules is to improve
student understanding of the breadth of engineering disciplines to aid in their
selection of a major and to introduce the practice of engineering.
Exam 1 20 percent - 110 minute in class midterm exam
Exam 2 25 percent - 110 minute in class comprehensive second exam
Lab Assignments 15 percent - Lab assignments will be assigned with each topic and
are designed to help students understand the course material, provide practical
programming experience, and help improve problem-solving abilities. Labs will
consist of both in-class activities and take-home assignments. While many
assignments will be individual, some lab assignments will be done in teams.
In-Class Quizzes 20 percent - You will have a variety of assignments throughout the
term, including lab assignments and in-class quizzes. In-class quizzes consist of
questions concerning material in the lecture and lab assignments. The purpose of
the quizzes is to help you stay caught up on the lecture material in the class as
well as to test your understanding of the lab assignments. The lowest quiz grade
Zybook Participation 9 percent - You will have to complete 95 percent of the Zybooks
reading material to earn this portion of your grade for this course. That means
reading and participating in the various interactive questions throughout each
module/chapter. Your participation must be completed no later than 1 week after
the lecture of that particular module. Failure to complete the reading and
activities of these modules in your Zybook will be recorded digitally and will be
Department Module Homework assignments 8 percent - Students must complete the
assignments having to do with the introduction of the engineering disciplines &
engineering practice, as well as the modules addressing student success.
Industry Night Essay and DI Saturday Essays 3 percent - You will be required to
attend 1 Industry Night Seminar during the term. These are informational events
featuring different companies that hire engineering graduates. Information on
dates and companies will be forthcoming. You will be required to attend 2
Department Information Presentations on Saturday, October 12, 2024. For all of
these events you will need to submit a short 250 word essay indicating you
attended and paid attention. More details on Industry Nights and DI Saturday will
The following grading scale will be used to determine your semester course grade,
your graded will not be rounded and assignments/exams will not be curved;
When submitting a file electronically via a Canvas or zyBooks submission box,
you are required to check that the file was uploaded successfully. This may be
checked by trying to download the file that you just submitted. This helps prevent
errors such as when students may inadvertently Save rather than Submit or
submit a corrupted file. Work that was Saved but not Submitted cannot be
accessed by the grading team and therefore will not be graded.
Late work is accepted, with a penalty. For 1 day late there is no penalty, do
not email me, just get it in. For 2 days late I expect an email informing me of
the late submission and you will receive a 10 percent reduction in your possible grade
for that assignment. For 3 days late I also require an email and there will be a
15 percent reduction in total possible points. For 4 plus days late I require an email and
office hours visit for potential submission, up to a 20 percent reduction may be
enforced. If no email is sent prior to the due date, I will not accept the late
work and it will be recorded in Canvas as a zero. Quizzes will not be rescheduled
for individuals without an excused absence or office hours meeting. The lowest
quiz grade will be dropped for each student, even if that grade is a zero.
Attendance in class is strongly recommended. Missed work may be made up if you
have an excused absence as defined in Part I, Section 7 of the TAMU Student Rules
or an unexcused absence approved by the instructor before missing class. In the
case of an emergency, you must send notification as soon as possible. There will
be no opportunity to make up missed work due to an unexcused absence that is not
approved by the instructor. Missed work must be made up or scheduled to make up
within one week of the absence. Work not made up within one week will be treated
as a late submission, and the normal penalties for late work will apply.
We will follow University rules and regulations as outlined in the TAMU
Student Rules for the University. You are expected to understand these policies.
Students must complete all parts of the course, including all exams and